README.md, before:

# t5x-train-and-test

## Project Description

### Team Members

- Stephen Petrides (sp4076)
- Zhejian Jin (zj2324)

Our goal is to pretrain various sizes of the T5 model, evaluate various sizes on two tasks with and without fine-tuning.

### Training

Since the T5 model is very large, millions or billions of parameters, we will have to use cloud compute and TPUs for training and evaluation. Further, it's not feasible to train any of these models from scratch, due to cost and time constraints; therefore, we will train the models for a one or more epochs and estimate to total time and cost of training.

### Evaluation

Google has provided pretrained models of various sizes that can be used for evaluation of various tasks. In addition to the pretrained models, Google also provides the sequence tasks for evaluation as TF datasets and as SeqIO tasks/mixtures.

We run the following experiments for each model:
 - [CNN DailyMail](https://paperswithcode.com/dataset/cnn-daily-mail-1)
 - [SQuAD](https://paperswithcode.com/dataset/squad)

For each trial, we evaluate the model and time the experiment.

## Repository Description

This repository holds the instructions and Gin config files for setting up and running the training and evaluation experiments.

## Running Experiments

### Getting Started

Create a TPU-connected VM on Google Cloud Platform (GCP).

```
$ gcloud compute tpus tpu-vm create t5x-vm-1 \
    --zone=us-central1-b \
    --accelerator-type=v2-8 \
    --version=tpu-vm-base
```

Connect to the VM via SSH.

```
$ gcloud alpha compute tpus tpu-vm ssh t5x-vm-1 --zone=us-central1-b
```

Now, in the VM, clone the t5x repository.

```
$ git clone https://github.com/google-research/t5x
```

Install depenencies (JAX) and update the $PATH.

```
$ cd t5x
$ python3 -m pip install -e '.[tpu]' -f https://storage.googleapis.com/jax-releases/libtpu_releases.html
$ python3 -m pip install "jax[tpu]>=0.2.16" -f https://storage.googleapis.com/jax-releases/libtpu_releases.html
$ export PATH="/home/$USER/.local/bin:$PATH"
```

```
$ export STORAGE_BUCKET=gs://t5x-store
$ export MODEL_DIR=${STORAGE_BUCKET}/model
$ export TFDS_DATA_DIR=${STORAGE_BUCKET}/data
$ export T5X_DIR=`pwd`
```

For each evaluation experiment, create or use a Gin config file and define the `MODEL_EVAL_PAIR` environment variable.

### Prepare Datasets

Clone the original T5 repository.

```
$ cd ~
$ git clone https://github.com/google-research/text-to-text-transfer-transformer
$ cd text-to-text-transfer-transformer/
```

Edit the task file in the following way.

```
diff --git a/t5/data/tasks.py b/t5/data/tasks.py
index 4ad29f5..faeb423 100644
--- a/t5/data/tasks.py
+++ b/t5/data/tasks.py
@@ -160,7 +160,7 @@ for b in tfds.text.glue.Glue.builder_configs.values():
 # =============================== CNN DailyMail ================================
 TaskRegistry.add(
     "cnn_dailymail_v002",
-    source=seqio.TfdsDataSource(tfds_name="cnn_dailymail:3.1.0"),
+    source=seqio.TfdsDataSource(tfds_name="cnn_dailymail:3.4.0"),
     preprocessors=[
         functools.partial(
             preprocessors.summarize,
@@ -335,7 +336,8 @@ TaskRegistry.add(
 # Maximized evaluation metrics over all answers.
 TaskRegistry.add(
     "squad_v010_allanswers",
-    source=seqio.TfdsDataSource(tfds_name="squad/v1.1:3.0.0"),
+    source=seqio.TfdsDataSource(
+        tfds_name="squad/v1.1:3.0.0",
+        splits={
+            "train": "train",
+            "validation": "validation[:50%]",
+            "test": "validation[:10%]",
+        },
+    ),
     preprocessors=[
         preprocessors.squad,
         seqio.preprocessors.tokenize,
```

Install the updated t5 package.

```
pip3 install .
```

### Train

```
$ cd ~/t5x
$ export MODEL_DIR=${STORAGE_BUCKET}/small-model
$ python3 -m t5x.train \
  --gin_file=small_pretrain.gin \
  --gin.MODEL_DIR=\"${MODEL_DIR}\" \
  --gin.USE_CACHED_TASKS=False
```

### Evalulate

For each experiment, make sure to define a Gin file and the `MODEL_EVAL_PAIR` and `EVAL_OUTPUT_DIR` environment variables.

```
$ export EVAL_OUTPUT_DIR=${STORAGE_BUCKET}/${MODEL_EVAL_PAIR}
$ cd t5x
$ time python3 -m t5x.eval \
  --gin_file=${MODEL_EVAL_PAIR}.gin \
  --gin.EVAL_OUTPUT_DIR=\"${EVAL_OUTPUT_DIR}\" \
  --gin.DROPOUT_RATE=\"0.2\"
```

The expected output is below.

```
evaluation.py:587] Evaluating cnn_dailymail_v002
utils.py:1280] length of dataset = 146
utils.py:1291] Padding infer dataset with 14 examples for even per-replica shards.
utils.py:1306] The infer dataset is sharded into 1 shards with per-shard batch size of 32
utils.py:1359] Inference of all batches done.
evaluation.py:755] Computing metrics for cnn_dailymail_v002
rouge_scorer.py:83] Using default tokenizer.
metrics.py:98] rouge1 = 8.14,1 95% confidence [7.09, 9.18]
metrics.py:98] rouge2 = 1.53, 95% confidence [1.08, 2.02]
metrics.py:98] rougeLsum = 7.47, 95% confidence [6.69, 8.41]
loggers.py:96] cnn_dailymail_v002/rouge1 at step 1000000: 8.140
loggers.py:96] cnn_dailymail_v002/rouge2 at step 1000000: 1.529
loggers.py:96] cnn_dailymail_v002/rougeLsum at step 1000000: 7.475
loggers.py:375] Appending metrics to gs://t5x-store/model-small-eval/inference_eval/cnn_dailymail_v002-metrics.jsonl
loggers.py:404] Writing inferences to gs://t5x-store/model-small-eval/inference_eval/cnn_dailymail_v002-1000000.jsonl
loggers.py:443] Writing completed in 0.244310 seconds (8.186316 examples/sec).
evaluation.py:611] Time computing metrics: 1.996996 secs.
```

## Results

### Training Time

Training time from scratch on a single TPU `v3-8` pod.

| Model | Parameters | Size Increase | Training Time (sec per 1K steps) | Training Time Increase |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| small | `76961152` | NA | 140.94 | NA |
| base | `247577856` | 3.22x | 490.93 | 3.48x |
| large | `783150080` | 3.16x | 1709.90 | 3.48x |
| xl | `2849757184` | 3.64x | NA | NA |
| xxl | `11135332352` | 3.91x | NA | NA |

Fixed cost of ~$5 per training hour on `v2-8`. We only used the `v2-8` pod type; to estimate the training time and cost for the `v3-8` would require a new set of experiments.

### Evaluation

Evaluation was done on both CPU and GPU without any finetuning.

#### CNN/Daily Mail abstractive summarization

| Model | Eval Time on CPU (sec) | Eval Time on GPU (sec) | Rouge1 | Rouge2 | RougeL |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |  --- | --- |
| small | 396 | 51 | 8.13 | 1.53 | 7.47 |
| base | 1147 | 78 | 9.78 | 1.81 | 8.70 |
| large | 2921 | 133 | 13.64 | 3.45 | 12.20 |
| xl | 5500* | 256 | 17.71 | 4.55 | 15.12 |
| xxl | NA | NA | NA | NA | NA |

#### SQuAD question answering

| Model | Eval Time on CPU (sec) | Eval Time on GPU (sec) | EM | FM |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| small | 591 | 47 | 0.000 | 1.697 |
| base | 1548 | 75 | 0.000 | 3.408 |
| large | 4182 | 134 | 0.000 | 6.456 |
| xl | 7950* | 249 | 0.000 | 5.442 |
| xxl | NA | NA | NA | NA |

### Finetuning

Finetune the Large model on various tasks.

#### CNN/Daily Mail abstractive summarization

| Finetuning Steps | Rouge1 | Rouge2 | RougeL |
| --- | --- |  --- | --- |
| 0 | 13.64 | 3.45 | 12.20 |
| 1000 | 26.85 | 7.79 | 22.48 |
| 2000 | 26.47 | 7.10 | 21.78 |
| 3000 | 25.81 | 6.67 | 21.62 |
| 4000 | 29.25 | 8.85 | 24.88 |
| 5000 | 28.90 | 8.51 | 24.34 |

#### SQuAD question answering

| Finetuning Steps | EM | F1 |
| --- | --- |  --- |
| 0 | 0.000 | 6.456 |
| 1000 | 23.898 | 47.581 |
| 2000 | 25.052 | 48.738 |
| 3000 | 24.465 | 48.904 |
| 4000 | 24.144 | 50.493 |
| 5000 | 25.676 | 50.563 |

Commit message:

Add some notes and observations

README.md, after:

# t5x-train-and-test

## Project Description

### Team Members

- Stephen Petrides (sp4076)
- Zhejian Jin (zj2324)

Our goal is to pretrain evaluate and fine-tune various sizes of the T5 on two language tasks.

### Training

Since the T5 model is very large, consisting of millions or billions of parameters, we will have to use cloud compute and TPUs for training and evaluation. Further, it's not feasible to train any of these models from scratch, due to cost and time constraints; therefore, we will train the models for a one or more epochs and estimate to total time and cost of training.

### Evaluation

Google has provided pretrained models of various sizes that can be used for evaluation of various tasks. In addition to the pretrained models, Google also provides the sequence tasks for evaluation as TF datasets and as SeqIO tasks/mixtures.

We run the following experiments for each model:
 - [CNN DailyMail](https://paperswithcode.com/dataset/cnn-daily-mail-1)
 - [SQuAD](https://paperswithcode.com/dataset/squad)

For each trial, we evaluate the model and time the experiment.

## Repository Description

This repository holds the instructions and Gin config files for setting up and running the training and evaluation experiments.

## Running Experiments

### Getting Started

Create a TPU-connected VM on Google Cloud Platform (GCP).

```
$ gcloud compute tpus tpu-vm create t5x-vm-1 \
    --zone=us-central1-b \
    --accelerator-type=v2-8 \
    --version=tpu-vm-base
```

Connect to the VM via SSH.

```
$ gcloud alpha compute tpus tpu-vm ssh t5x-vm-1 --zone=us-central1-b
```

Now, in the VM, clone the t5x repository.

```
$ git clone https://github.com/google-research/t5x
```

Install depenencies (JAX) and update the $PATH.

```
$ cd t5x
$ python3 -m pip install -e '.[tpu]' -f https://storage.googleapis.com/jax-releases/libtpu_releases.html
$ python3 -m pip install "jax[tpu]>=0.2.16" -f https://storage.googleapis.com/jax-releases/libtpu_releases.html
$ export PATH="/home/$USER/.local/bin:$PATH"
```

```
$ export STORAGE_BUCKET=gs://t5x-store
$ export MODEL_DIR=${STORAGE_BUCKET}/model
$ export TFDS_DATA_DIR=${STORAGE_BUCKET}/data
$ export T5X_DIR=`pwd`
```

For each evaluation experiment, create or use a Gin config file and define the `MODEL_EVAL_PAIR` environment variable.

### Prepare Datasets

Clone the original T5 repository.

```
$ cd ~
$ git clone https://github.com/google-research/text-to-text-transfer-transformer
$ cd text-to-text-transfer-transformer/
```

Edit the task file in the following way.

```
diff --git a/t5/data/tasks.py b/t5/data/tasks.py
index 4ad29f5..faeb423 100644
--- a/t5/data/tasks.py
+++ b/t5/data/tasks.py
@@ -160,7 +160,7 @@ for b in tfds.text.glue.Glue.builder_configs.values():
 # =============================== CNN DailyMail ================================
 TaskRegistry.add(
     "cnn_dailymail_v002",
-    source=seqio.TfdsDataSource(tfds_name="cnn_dailymail:3.1.0"),
+    source=seqio.TfdsDataSource(tfds_name="cnn_dailymail:3.4.0"),
     preprocessors=[
         functools.partial(
             preprocessors.summarize,
@@ -335,7 +336,8 @@ TaskRegistry.add(
 # Maximized evaluation metrics over all answers.
 TaskRegistry.add(
     "squad_v010_allanswers",
-    source=seqio.TfdsDataSource(tfds_name="squad/v1.1:3.0.0"),
+    source=seqio.TfdsDataSource(
+        tfds_name="squad/v1.1:3.0.0",
+        splits={
+            "train": "train",
+            "validation": "validation[:50%]",
+            "test": "validation[:10%]",
+        },
+    ),
     preprocessors=[
         preprocessors.squad,
         seqio.preprocessors.tokenize,
```

Install the updated t5 package.

```
pip3 install .
```

### Train

For each model, running the following command, changing the model reference Gin file and name each time.

```
$ cd ~/t5x
$ export MODEL_DIR=${STORAGE_BUCKET}/small-model
$ python3 -m t5x.train \
  --gin_file=small_pretrain.gin \
  --gin.MODEL_DIR=\"${MODEL_DIR}\" \
  --gin.USE_CACHED_TASKS=False
```

See the results section below for the results and observations.

### Evalulate

For each experiment, make sure to define a Gin file and the `MODEL_EVAL_PAIR` and `EVAL_OUTPUT_DIR` environment variables.

```
$ export EVAL_OUTPUT_DIR=${STORAGE_BUCKET}/${MODEL_EVAL_PAIR}
$ cd t5x
$ time python3 -m t5x.eval \
  --gin_file=${MODEL_EVAL_PAIR}.gin \
  --gin.EVAL_OUTPUT_DIR=\"${EVAL_OUTPUT_DIR}\" \
  --gin.DROPOUT_RATE=\"0.2\"
```

The expected output is below.

```
evaluation.py:587] Evaluating cnn_dailymail_v002
utils.py:1280] length of dataset = 146
utils.py:1291] Padding infer dataset with 14 examples for even per-replica shards.
utils.py:1306] The infer dataset is sharded into 1 shards with per-shard batch size of 32
utils.py:1359] Inference of all batches done.
evaluation.py:755] Computing metrics for cnn_dailymail_v002
rouge_scorer.py:83] Using default tokenizer.
metrics.py:98] rouge1 = 8.14,1 95% confidence [7.09, 9.18]
metrics.py:98] rouge2 = 1.53, 95% confidence [1.08, 2.02]
metrics.py:98] rougeLsum = 7.47, 95% confidence [6.69, 8.41]
loggers.py:96] cnn_dailymail_v002/rouge1 at step 1000000: 8.140
loggers.py:96] cnn_dailymail_v002/rouge2 at step 1000000: 1.529
loggers.py:96] cnn_dailymail_v002/rougeLsum at step 1000000: 7.475
loggers.py:375] Appending metrics to gs://t5x-store/model-small-eval/inference_eval/cnn_dailymail_v002-metrics.jsonl
loggers.py:404] Writing inferences to gs://t5x-store/model-small-eval/inference_eval/cnn_dailymail_v002-1000000.jsonl
loggers.py:443] Writing completed in 0.244310 seconds (8.186316 examples/sec).
evaluation.py:611] Time computing metrics: 1.996996 secs.
```

See the results section below for the results and observations.

## Results

### Training Time

Training time from scratch on a single TPU `v3-8` pod.

| Model | Parameters | Size Increase | Training Time (sec per 1K steps) | Training Time Increase |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| small | `76961152` | NA | 140.94 | NA |
| base | `247577856` | 3.22x | 490.93 | 3.48x |
| large | `783150080` | 3.16x | 1709.90 | 3.48x |
| xl | `2849757184` | 3.64x | NA | NA |
| xxl | `11135332352` | 3.91x | NA | NA |

Fixed cost of ~$5 per training hour on `v2-8` and ~$8 per training hour on `v3.8`. To extrapolate the full pretraining time multiple the training time per 1000 steps by the number of iterations of that size intended. To estimate the cost, convert from seconds to hours and multiply by the relevant cost per training hour.

For example, at this pace, it would take nearly 500 hours (19 days) to train the `large` model.

### Evaluation

Evaluation was done on both CPU and GPU without any finetuning.

#### CNN/Daily Mail abstractive summarization

| Model | Eval Time on CPU (sec) | Eval Time on GPU (sec) | Rouge1 | Rouge2 | RougeL |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |  --- | --- |
| small | 396 | 51 | 8.13 | 1.53 | 7.47 |
| base | 1147 | 78 | 9.78 | 1.81 | 8.70 |
| large | 2921 | 133 | 13.64 | 3.45 | 12.20 |
| xl | 5500* | 256 | 17.71 | 4.55 | 15.12 |
| xxl | NA | NA | NA | NA | NA |

#### SQuAD question answering

| Model | Eval Time on CPU (sec) | Eval Time on GPU (sec) | EM | FM |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| small | 591 | 47 | 0.000 | 1.697 |
| base | 1548 | 75 | 0.000 | 3.408 |
| large | 4182 | 134 | 0.000 | 6.456 |
| xl | 7950* | 249 | 0.000 | 5.442 |
| xxl | NA | NA | NA | NA |

As the model size increases, the evaluation time on CPU and GPU increases. Further, the performance generally improves each time, with some exceptions. Still, without fine-tuning the performance is not near SOTA.

### Fine-tuning

We performed fine-tuning on the Large model on both tasks. For each, we trained for 5000 steps and evaluated performance at each 1000 steps. After fine-tuning, the performance moves closer to SOTA performance.

#### CNN/Daily Mail abstractive summarization

| Finetuning Steps | Rouge1 | Rouge2 | RougeL |
| --- | --- |  --- | --- |
| 0 | 13.64 | 3.45 | 12.20 |
| 1000 | 26.85 | 7.79 | 22.48 |
| 2000 | 26.47 | 7.10 | 21.78 |
| 3000 | 25.81 | 6.67 | 21.62 |
| 4000 | 29.25 | 8.85 | 24.88 |
| 5000 | 28.90 | 8.51 | 24.34 |

#### SQuAD question answering

| Finetuning Steps | EM | F1 |
| --- | --- |  --- |
| 0 | 0.000 | 6.456 |
| 1000 | 23.898 | 47.581 |
| 2000 | 25.052 | 48.738 |
| 3000 | 24.465 | 48.904 |
| 4000 | 24.144 | 50.493 |
| 5000 | 25.676 | 50.563 |
